In the last lesson we discussed how to read various file types into R. In each of these examples, we first had to upload the file into our R Studio Cloud project before we could read the file into R using one of the read_ functions. What if we could cut out that first step, eliminating the need to upload the file into our project? This way, we could just use one function to read data directly into R Studio Cloud. This is capable thanks to data stored Google Sheets and the fantastic R package google sheets. Additionally, using this approach, we can read in and analyze data hosted on Google Sheets in real-time. This means that as the data are updated over time, you can read the data into R and analyze it in its current state. Then, when the data are updated, you just re-run your code, and you'll get an updated analysis. To see what we mean specifically, let's take a look at an example.

Imagine you've sent out a survey to your friends asking about how they spend their day. Let's say you're mostly interested in knowing the hours spent on work, leisure, sleep, eating, socializing, and other activities. So in your Google Sheet you add these six items as columns and one column asking for your friends names. To collect this data, you then share the link with your friends, giving them the ability to edit the Google Sheet. 

Your friends will then one-by-one complete the survey. And, because it's a Google Sheet, everyone will be able to update the Google Sheet, regardless of whether or not someone else is also looking at the Sheet at the same time. As they do, you'll be able to pull the data and import it to R for analysis at any point. You won't have to wait for everyone to respond. You'll be able to analyze the results in real-time by directly reading it into R from Google Sheets, avoiding  the need to download it each time you do so.  In other words, every time you import the data from the Google Sheets link using the google sheets package, the most updated data will be imported. Let's say, after waiting for a week, your friends' data look something like what you see here! We'll work on getting this read directly into R!

The google sheets package allows R users to take advantage of the Google Sheets A P I. In the first lesson in this course we mentioned that an A P I allows different application to communicate with one another. In this case, Google has released an A P I that allows other software to communicate with Google Sheets and retrieve data and information directly from Google Sheets. The google sheets package enables R users to then easily access that A P I and retrieve your Google Sheets data.  Using this package is is the best and easiest way to analyze and edit Google Sheets data in R. In addition to the ability of pulling data, you can also edit a Google Sheet or create new sheets. Like any other package, we first need to install and attach the package. 

Every time you start a new session, you need to authenticate the use of google sheets package with your Google account. This is a great features as it ensures that you want to allow access to your Google Sheets and allows the Google Sheets A P I to make sure that you should have access to the files you're going to try to access.  The code you see here will open a new page in your browser that asks you which Google account's Google Sheets you'd like to give access to. Click on the appropriate Google user to provide google sheets access to the Google Sheets A P I.

After you click ALLOW, giving permission for the google sheets package to connect to your Google account, you will likely be shown a screen where you will be asked to copy an authentication code. Copy this authentication code and paste it in your R Studio Cloud console.

Once authenticated, you can use the functions you see here to list all your worksheets on Google Sheets as a table and to identify and register a specific sheet. 

In this case the sheet that you created and named "survey", you need to use the function g s underscore title. We'll assign this information to the object survey underscore sheet.If you type the name of the sheet correctly, you will see a message that says Sheet successfully identified: "survey". 

At this point, you can read the data into R using the function g s underscore read with the survey underscore sheet object output from g s underscore title as your input to g s underscore read:

There are additional (optional) arguments to g s underscore read, which you see here. Some are similar to those in read underscore c s v and read underscore excel, while others are more specific to reading in Google Sheets:

In addition to reading in data from Google Sheets directly using the google sheets package, you can also modify your Google Sheet directly through R. For example, you can edit a cell or add a row to your sheet. Let's say you'd like to add your own respond to the survey. For this you can use the command g s underscore add underscore row. Note that the input argument specifies what you would like to add in the new row. If everything goes well, you will get a message saying Row successfully appended. 

If you now check the sheet on Google Sheets, you will see the appended row.

To edit a specific cell you can use the command g s underscore edit underscore cell but you will have to tell google sheets which specific cell to edit. Let's say we want to change the value of the cell D 4 from 0 to 2. For this we will use the g s underscore edit underscore cells function. The anchor argument points to the cell that we want to modify and the input argument contains the new value that we want to assign to the cell. If you were to return to your Google Sheets, you'd notice that cell D4 now has a 2, rather than a 0 in it!

This lesson has focused on getting data from Google Sheets into R Studio Cloud; however, sometimes the data you need to work with is elsewhere online but you'd like to store it in a Google Sheet. While we will later learn that you can import them directly into R, it's good to know that you can also import CSV files hosted on the web directly into Google Sheets. For instance, the dataset we'll import here is a CSV file containing countries G D Ps (national incomes). In order to import the file directly to Google Sheets, open a blank Google Sheets document as we learned before. In the first cell (at the top left corner), type in what you see on the slide.`. Make sure to include the equal sign in the beginning. 

This will import all the data to your Google Sheets document. You can then use the steps discussed above any time you want to work with these data in R Studio Cloud.
