One of the advantages of R is its ability to read real-time data hosted on Google Sheets. Why is this an advantage? Well, imagine you are sending out a survey to your friends asking about how they spend their day. You already know about Google Sheets so one easy way is to create a Google Sheet and share the link with your friends. Again, you should know by now how to share a Google Sheets.

Let's say you're mostly interested in knowing the hours spend on work, leisure, sleep, eating, socilizing, and other activities. So in your Google Sheet you add these six items as columns and one column asking for your friends names. Something like this. Make sure you name your sheet with something, for instance survey.

Your friends will one by one complete the survey but the nice thing is that you can pull the data and import it to R for analysis in real-time and directly from Google Sheets without downloding it. In other words, everytime you import the data from the Google Sheets link, the most updated data will be imported. Let's say, after waiting for a week, your friends' data look like this

But how is this possible? We can do this using google sheets package in R. google sheets is a Google Sheets R API and is the best way to analyze and edit Google Sheets data in R. In addition to the ability of pulling data, you can also edit a google Sheet or create new sheets. Like any other package, we first need to install and attach the package. 

Let's import your survey data into R. Every time you start a new session, you need to authenticate the use of google sheets package with your Google account. The command g s auth will open a new page in your browser that asks you accessing your Google Sheets. After you allow the connection to your Google account, you can use the command g s l s to list all your worksheets on Google Sheets as a table. In order to access a specific sheet, in this case the sheet that you created and named survey, you need to use the function g s title. If you type the name of the sheet correctly, you will see a message that says Sheet successfully identified: "survey". Now you can read the data into a variable using the function g s read. Note that if you use the attribute skip is equal to one the first row will be skipped. You can change the row number to any row number you need to be ignored. However, since our first row of our survey sheet is our column names, we need to import everything so we won't use the attribute skip. By using this your data will be imported as a table in the variable survey data. If you want your data as a data frame, you can use the command  as data frame to save your data as a data frame.

The following attributes can be used when using the g s read command. The range attribute gives the range of cells that we like to import. For instance range equal to A1 to G5 means that we like to import cells A1 to G5. n max can be used to limit the number of rows that we want to import. col names dictates whether we want the first row as column names. If we use col names equal to FALSE no column names will be imported.

What else is cool about google sheets? You can modify your Google sheet throught R. You can edit a cell or add a row to your sheet. Let's say you like to add your own respond to the survey. For this you can use the command g s add row. If everything goes well, you will get a message saying Row successfully appended. 

If you now check the sheet on Google Sheets, you will see the appended row.

In orther to edit a specific cell you can use the command g s edit cell but you will have to tell which specific cell. Let's say we want to change the value of the cell D4 from 0 to 2. For this we will use the g s edit cells command like this. The anchor attribute points to the cell that we want to modify and the input attribute contains the new value that we want to assign to the cell.